Corruption Detection and Repair, by Jeff Davis (PGCon 2013)
** TODO:
* get pg_filedump. install it everywhere you run servers.
* follow http://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Corruption_Detection_and_Containment

ERROR: invalid page header in
   blah blah blah

problem: you get a bad block
1. find out what failed
   hardware?
   firmware?
   fs?
   pg?
   backup/replication policy?
   …

detection at the fs level is nice
copy-on-write fs'es do this:
    zfs does
    butrfs does too, but who runs DBs on butrfs?
    if you're on a different fs, you're out of luck
non-copy-on-write fs'es can, but get false positives or performance problems
butrfs and zfs are bad for DBs, usually
    locality gets shot; seq scans don't work.
caveat: these fs'es don't check the in-memory cache for corruption

anyway…

goals: detect corruption early, before it can get into the replica or backup

detection
    page header check built into pg (must monitor for these!)
    9.3 has checksums as well, and keeps corruption out of the executor
        these are basically a better page header check
            works even if you move the block to a new location (transposition)
    9.3: to get checksums, must dump/restore — pg_upgrade won't do.
    pg_filedump | grep Error # pretty much the only way short of a hex editor
        better than the page header check
        run on files, offline

propagation
    if corruption hits the executor, you get a mysterious crash (bad)
    or wrong results (much worse, of course). again, 9.3 is nearly immune
    to that.

propagation… to backups
    the only countermeasures:
        - validate your backups using pg_filedump, or
        - use streaming replication
          - this catches any corruption that happens in the wAL logs.
          - but it doesn't catch corruption in the base
            - … and if you resync, you're implicitly doing a base backup
          - special case: sometimes SR has to fetch a page that's already been
            written to disk and stream it (because it fell behind, and
            that page got written). This makes it *more* likely to detect
            corruption, not less so. WAL logs are checksummed, and
            have been for many pg versions. 

what about full page writes?
    usually the master needs to read. if you're on 9.3, then checksums
    will catch the problem.

remember to check both master and replica. Corruption can happen either place!

audience tip: a VACUUM is one way to force a scan of your whole DB

recovery
    fail over to a good replica
    restore from a good backup
    … or, if corruption propagated… you probably will lose data.

