Understanding PostgreSQL timelines, by Heikki, VMWare (PGCon 2013)

first, pitr
    every pitr restore creates a new timeline
    
    pg gives each timeline a unique ID
    A/15000000
    A/20000000
    a single server sees only the "active" timeline
    i.e., look back from a given point in time, and history always seems linear

    recovery ends when you stop replaying and start accepting writes
    at the end, it chooses a new timeline id
        based on scanning the WAL dir and seeing which ids are used already
    then it writes the timeline history file

    the first WAL file of the new timeline
    is the same as the last WAL file of the old timeline
    but with a different name

    pg_xlog/$id.history

    1 13/E4000000 n reovetry target specificed
    2 13/ED000090 at restore point "some comment"

    ^ first col is the timeline id of the *parent* timeline

    this file is just here for your information.

*backup* history file is something different
(backup *label* file is something different still: PGDATA/backup_label)

so, again:
    backup label file: needed by system. important. don't touch. human-readable
    backup history file: fyi only
    timeline history file: needed for recovery. important.

timelines are important because the master can take writes *after* recovery
  starts.

    synchronous replication is no exception.
    
    commits are still written to disk on the master
    before bering written on the replica.

    even if you don't lose commits, WAL records aren't synchronous
    — that would totally kill performance

9.3 enhancements (largely thanks to Heikki!)
    now streaming replication can follow a timeline switch
    (before, you needed a WAL archive in order to make the switch)

    pg_receivexlog too can follow a timeline switch

    this meant adding to the protocol to support
      fetching the history files
      so now the replica knows about ALL the TIMELINES

    works for cascading replication too

    yay!

trick: during recovery use rsync to do the equivalent of a base backup
but Heikki's working on a better way:
pg_rewind
    one nice thing: doesn't require shell access
    only postgres SUPERUSER access

